README.md, before:

# Password Manager V2 Server

##### -> Here is my <a href="https://github.com/Aleksandar15/password-manager-frontend">frontend</a> code

#### Visit my live website here: https://alek-password-manager.netlify.app

##### Test login user:

- E-mail: test@test.com
- Password: test

#### About my Full-Stack Password Manager app:

I created this project with one of the main goal being that to challenge my web security skills. In the process I learned that while you can't control which links the frontend user clicks or which apps they may install (_that could be malicious_), we as developers should focus to minimize those risks by maximizing security steps required to access sensitive data. All that **must** be achieved by finding a sweet spot between trying to not annoy our users and securing their data.

#### Special features I implemented:

##### On the frontend

- With React I avoided any unnecessary re-renders & used strategic re-renders to my advantage for features like `multi-device` for example: _user A_ logged on '_device A_' modifies its "password vault", then the same _user A_ but logged on '_device B_' - when they try any CRUD operations on their (unrefreshed) "password vault" page - they will get the latest changes (made on _device A_) **without any refresh** on their _device B_. While also my goal was to use as minimum libraries as possible and to keep following the DRY principle by building reusable components myself & creating custom hooks.

##### On the backend

- I implemented "_refresh tokens_" which are long-lived besides "_access tokens_" which are short-lived. However I gave the clients an option to stay signed-in until they manually log out in cases where they fully trust their device & network. The user requires a valid _refresh token_ in order to request a new _access token_ - on success they get both new _accessToken_ & _refreshToken_ - while on invalid or expired _refresh token_ the said token is removed from the database and the user is alerted accordingly and redirected to the login page on the frontend.
- Anti-hacks security: in case where the user's _refreshToken_ is not inside the database -> it means the _refreshToken_ was used by someone else (I suspect it's a hacker) and I alert the user about the potential threat.

##### The challenge

- "_Multi-device_" feature allows the _user A_ logged on _device A_ to "_log out all devices_"(meaning: empties out the array of _refreshToken_'s in the database) which will technically log-out the same _user A_ but logged on _device B_ & my "safety alert-message" about _anti-hacks_ will get triggered, therefore, the message itself has to have empathy about such a case scenario where some of their family members clicked the "_logout all devices_" button on another device as an example. It was kind of like a Catch-22 where I couldn't have a separate message and the solution was a _guided-empathetic-message_ to make sure I'm not misleading my users.

#### My PERN Stack technologies:

###### Postgres DB + ExpressJS + ReactJS + NodeJS

## Run my backend project

- Clone this project.
- Navigate (cd) into your project directory.
- Run `npm install` in your command line.
- Run `npm start` in your command line.
- Visit http://localhost:3003 in your browser!
- _Optional_: you may want to connect it with my <a href="https://github.com/Aleksandar15/password-manager-frontend">frontend</a> project.

# NOTES

**1.** In order to run my full-stack app successfully on your local development by combining _this_ server & my <a href="https://github.com/Aleksandar15/password-manager-frontend">frontend</a> you may want to remove all the `domain` properties on authentication (`refreshToken`'s) cookies creation or just modify `domain`'s values to the appropriate URL your frontend runs on.

**2.** Your **`secretPasswordEncryption`** secret inside `.env` file must be of 32 bytes (which equals to 256 bits) which means it **must** be **exactly** 32 characters long.

**3.** You **must** add your frontend URL to the `allowedOrigins` file located in `config/allowedOrigins.js` directory so that CORS will allow the requests to be made to the server.

### HOW TO's

###### How to clone the project?

##### Clone with HTTPS URL: `git clone https://github.com/Aleksandar15/Password-Manager-server.git`

##### Clone with SSH URL: `git clone git@github.com:Aleksandar15/Password-Manager-server.git`

###### How to connect to the frontend?

##### Clone the frontend code from <a href="https://github.com/Aleksandar15/password-manager-frontend">here</a> & follow the instructions there.

---

**More info**:

1. <a href="https://github.com/Aleksandar15/Password-Manager-frontend/blob/main/src/components/PersistLogin/PersistLogin.js">`PersistLogin`</a> on frontend could be named "`PersistLoading`" because throughout development I modified it to persist "`Loading`" page always and to never give an '_empty skeleton-page_' of a protected route (see ex. #1.1). I compared my app to instagram for inspiration and achieved exactly what I imagined. All the while auth-checks are handled in each component and they all have "`Loading`" as default state which is pretty cool.

###### 1.1 Example: to never give away an '_empty skeleton-page_' of a protected route (ex. `/manager`) to _unauthorized user_ - and the other way - to never visually show unauthenticated route like `/login` to _authorized user_ and instead after "Loading" -> redirect them back to _authorized route_ `/manager`.

2. <a href="https://github.com/Aleksandar15/password-manager-server/blob/main/controllers/refreshTokenController.js">`refreshTokenController`</a> on the server is rotating each valid non-expired `refreshToken` with a new one and I am passing the remaining '_expiryTime_' from the old one which was now "_invalidated_" - meaning it was removed from database & replaced with `newRefreshToken`. That's a perfect security feature I implemented on my app.

3. <a href="https://github.com/Aleksandar15/Password-Manager-frontend/blob/main/src/Utils/api/axios.js" target="_blank">`Axios`</a> frontend utils created using `axios.create` method by default parses my JSON data behind the scenes hence why I don't use `JSON.parse` on my backend. If I were to send a JSON I'd need the <a href="https://axios-http.com/docs/req_config" target="_blank">`transformRequest`</a> function.

Commit message:

Project goals
I added more extra reminders.

README.md, after:

# Password Manager V2 Server

##### -> Here is my <a href="https://github.com/Aleksandar15/password-manager-frontend">frontend</a> code

#### Visit my live website here: https://alek-password-manager.netlify.app

##### Test login user:

- E-mail: test@test.com
- Password: test

#### About my Full-Stack Password Manager app:

I created this project with one of the main goal being that to challenge my web security skills. In the process I learned that while you can't control which links the frontend user clicks or which apps they may install (_that could be malicious_), we as developers should focus to minimize those risks by maximizing security steps required to access sensitive data. All that **must** be achieved by finding a sweet spot between trying to not annoy our users and securing their data.

#### Special features I implemented:

##### On the frontend

- With React I avoided any unnecessary re-renders & used strategic re-renders to my advantage for features like `multi-device` for example: _user A_ logged on '_device A_' modifies its "password vault", then the same _user A_ but logged on '_device B_' - when they try any CRUD operations on their (unrefreshed) "password vault" page - they will get the latest changes (made on _device A_) **without any refresh** on their _device B_. While also my goal was to use as minimum libraries as possible and to keep following the DRY principle by building reusable components myself & creating custom hooks.

##### On the backend

- I implemented "_refresh tokens_" which are long-lived besides "_access tokens_" which are short-lived. However I gave the clients an option to stay signed-in until they manually log out in cases where they fully trust their device & network. The user requires a valid _refresh token_ in order to request a new _access token_ - on success they get both new _accessToken_ & _refreshToken_ - while on invalid or expired _refresh token_ the said token is removed from the database and the user is alerted accordingly and redirected to the login page on the frontend.
- Anti-hacks security: in case where the user's _refreshToken_ is not inside the database -> it means the _refreshToken_ was used by someone else (I suspect it's a hacker) and I alert the user about the potential threat.

##### The challenge

- "_Multi-device_" feature allows the _user A_ logged on _device A_ to "_log out all devices_"(meaning: empties out the array of _refreshToken_'s in the database) which will technically log-out the same _user A_ but logged on _device B_ & my "safety alert-message" about _anti-hacks_ will get triggered, therefore, the message itself has to have empathy about such a case scenario where some of their family members clicked the "_logout all devices_" button on another device as an example. It was kind of like a Catch-22 where I couldn't have a separate message and the solution was a _guided-empathetic-message_ to make sure I'm not misleading my users.

#### My PERN Stack technologies:

###### Postgres DB + ExpressJS + ReactJS + NodeJS

## Run my backend project

- Clone this project.
- Navigate (cd) into your project directory.
- Run `npm install` in your command line.
- Run `npm start` in your command line.
- Visit http://localhost:3003 in your browser!
- _Optional_: you may want to connect it with my <a href="https://github.com/Aleksandar15/password-manager-frontend">frontend</a> project.

# NOTES

**1.** In order to run my full-stack app successfully on your local development by combining _this_ server & my <a href="https://github.com/Aleksandar15/password-manager-frontend">frontend</a> you may want to remove all the `domain` properties on authentication (`refreshToken`'s) cookies creation or just modify `domain`'s values to the appropriate URL your frontend runs on.

**2.** Your **`secretPasswordEncryption`** secret inside `.env` file must be of 32 bytes (which equals to 256 bits) which means it **must** be **exactly** 32 characters long.

**3.** You **must** add your frontend URL to the `allowedOrigins` file located in `config/allowedOrigins.js` directory so that CORS will allow the requests to be made to the server.

### HOW TO's

###### How to clone the project?

##### Clone with HTTPS URL: `git clone https://github.com/Aleksandar15/Password-Manager-server.git`

##### Clone with SSH URL: `git clone git@github.com:Aleksandar15/Password-Manager-server.git`

###### How to connect to the frontend?

##### Clone the frontend code from <a href="https://github.com/Aleksandar15/password-manager-frontend">here</a> & follow the instructions there.

---

**More info (*extra reminders for me*)**:

1. <a href="https://github.com/Aleksandar15/Password-Manager-frontend/blob/main/src/components/PersistLogin/PersistLogin.js">`PersistLogin`</a> on frontend could be named "`PersistLoading`" because throughout development I modified it to persist "`Loading`" page always and to never give an '_empty skeleton-page_' of a protected route (see ex. #1.1). I compared my app to instagram for inspiration and achieved exactly what I imagined. All the while auth-checks are handled in each component and they all have "`Loading`" as default state which is pretty cool.

###### 1.1 Example: to never give away an '_empty skeleton-page_' of a protected route (ex. `/manager`) to _unauthorized user_ - and the other way - to never visually show unauthenticated route like `/login` to _authorized user_ and instead after "Loading" -> redirect them back to _authorized route_ `/manager`.

2. <a href="https://github.com/Aleksandar15/password-manager-server/blob/main/controllers/refreshTokenController.js">`refreshTokenController`</a> on the server is rotating each valid non-expired `refreshToken` with a new one and I am passing the remaining '_expiryTime_' from the old one which was now "_invalidated_" - meaning it was removed from database & replaced with `newRefreshToken`. That's a perfect security feature I implemented on my app.

3. <a href="https://github.com/Aleksandar15/Password-Manager-frontend/blob/main/src/Utils/api/axios.js" target="_blank">`Axios`</a> frontend utils created using `axios.create` method by default parses my JSON data behind the scenes hence why I don't use `JSON.parse` on my backend. If I were to send a JSON I'd need the <a href="https://axios-http.com/docs/req_config" target="_blank">`transformRequest`</a> function.

4. Server is deployed on <a href="https://fly.io/docs/apps/deploy">fly.io</a> which allows only 1 server to be run for free which is available 24/7 (*no sleep time*), well actually 5 "*clusters*" are free but the *node.js* server takes up 2 and the <a href="https://fly.io/docs/postgres/">postgres</a> database 1, so the remaining 2 can't be used for another server.
    - As of April 2023 they seem to have fixed that issue, now: 1 server takes up 1 VM (*virtual machine*) and 1 database takes up 1VM, but <a href="https://fly.io/docs/about/pricing/#free-allowances">free allowance</a> is reduced to 3VM, so it remains only 1 full backend for free.
